once around Huame.
So this object was discovered in 2004 by
Mike Brown and his colleagues at Caltech
using the Palomar Observatory
and then there were precovery images
going back to 2003 leading to its
designation 2003 EL61.
There was something of a controversy
about this and uh some issues about uh
some other researchers who seem to have
access to Mike Brown's data, but I won't
go into that. Now,
interestingly, searches of old images
all the way back to the Paloma survey in
the 1950s
revealed that Huame had been picked up
then and just not recognized for what it
was. And that's always very useful
because it's given about 50 years of
baseline on which the orbit can be
estimated.
The name Huaame, well, it's named after
the Hawaiian goddess of childbirth and
fertility. And the object itself orbits
out in the Kiper belt beyond Neptune,
taking 284 years to go around. You can
see the path is marked in yellow there.
And that goes from 35 to 52 astronomical
units from the sun. The earth's sun
distance 1 au. Neptune lies in an orbit
around 30. And you can see that the
orbit of Huame is a little bit more
elliptical and comes somewhat closer to
Neptune
orbit on some occasions and further away
at others.
has a similar orbit to Pluto except for
the fact that Pluto's orbit actually
manages to cross Neptune's orbit. You
can see that in the purple trace. And
they're both tilted at quite an angle to
the normal plane of the solar system.
You can't see that in this picture, but
the inclination is quite high, taking
Huame well outside the normal ecliptic
plane. And of course that's why it was
missed for many years because most
searches for moving objects were in the
plane of the solar system where most of
the asteroids and so forth tend to be.
Now its orbit is in a complicated 7 to
12 orbital resonance.
This means that for every seven orbits
that Haame does, Neptune does exactly
12. And that manages to keep the two
apart, which is good. An encounter with
a giant planet can destabilize your
orbit.
Observing wise, well, this is an amateur
level photograph taken with ordinary
telescope and a digital camera showing
Huame having moved over a period of 3
days. It's the third brightest object in
the Kyper belt after Eris and Pluto.
Magnitude 17 to be technical about it.
And so actually just about within range
of uh many people to actually go and
track down.
Physically it's about a third the mass
of Pluto which makes it about one
1,400th
that of the Earth. And the light curve
shown at the bottom right there reveals
that the brightness oscillates backwards
and forwards over a period of 4 hours
which shows that it's spinning and that
the aspect of the shape of it is
changing from our point of view with
either a wide or a narrow view resulting
in either more or less light coming back
to us from this very elongated shape.
It's twice as long as it is wide.
It's also very shiny. That accounts for
it being perhaps slightly brighter than
uh you might expect for its size,
reflecting somewhere around 60 to 80% of
the overall incoming light, which must
be quite dim at that sort of distance.
But nevertheless, uh that's a lot more
light reflected um in terms of a
percentage than objects such as the
moon, which is only about 11 or 12%.
And a low temperature on the surface,
not surprising, at this distance from
the sun, less than 50 Kelvin above
absolute zero.
But that shiny nature is down to the
fact that it's covered in crystalline
water ice. And the water ice is
interesting because it shouldn't really
be there. It should be unstable in the
presence of ultraviolet light and in
particular cosmic radiation bathing the
surface unprotected by an atmosphere
should turn the crystals from their
regular shape into an amorphous mess in
quite a short period of time. Anything
from you know few tens of thousands to a
100 thousand years and the crystals
would degrade. So this material is in
astronomical terms at least fresh and
the surface is described as a young
surface. It's also interesting because
these water ice crystals tend to only
form at a higher temperature.
Temperatures below 50 Kelvin are too low
for you to get ice crystals. You
actually get a different form of ice for
being created instead. And so this
suggests that the conditions under which
the ice formed recently were warmer. So
an interesting puzzle.
You can also see that one end of the
object is very very red indeed.
And this red color is quite common in
outer solar system objects. It seems
that at the low temperatures
and uh in a near vacuum the radiation
can affect materials on the surface and
cause this reening and darkening. Effect
effectively it turns methane and carbon
monoxide which can freeze out onto the
surface uh along with nitrogen and water
and mixes those together into
interesting polymers called folins. long
chains of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen,
and oxygen bonded together in a somewhat
irregular mixture and that creates this
red color.
But it's rather unclear as to why one
end of the object is red and the rest of
it is fresh white water ice. So quite a
puzzle.
Now, it's known to have a pair of moons.
I love this little animation that we
have here. Um,
you can see the two moons orbiting
rapidly and they have these uh
interesting Hawaiian names. Hayyaki and
Namaka, 310 kilometers and 170 km in
diameter. That's quite large for a outer
solar system moon um and not too
dissimilar from the size of some of
these uh other copa belt objects that
we're finding. and their orbits are
almost edge on or they were during the
period when this image was taken and
during 2008 to 2011 we were able to see
them being occulted and eclipsing with
um the main body of Hame
and that can provide information about
this surface because you either have the
light from all of the bodies or you have
some of it go missing.
And if you know the position of the
moons, then you can do a computer
process that was done with Pluto and
Sharon and enabled us to map the surface
of Pluto back in the 1980s.
Now, in addition to the two moons, it
appears that Huame has a ring system as
well. It passed in front of a distant
background star, creating an
occultation. And that's very useful in
that if you time the occultation and you
know how fast the object is moving then
you can figure out uh by doing some
trigonometry with its distance from
earth how big it is. You get a number of
different diameters across it or chords
across it from different observing sites
seeing different lengths of time. and
you can map its shape and all of that
was excellent uhly performed in order to
understand the shape of Huame. But it
also showed that there was a flickering
on and off of the light as the star
approached and departed.
And this revealed that there is a ring
system around this little object that's
around just over 2,200 kilometers in
diameter.
Now in addition to finding Huaame and
its two moons and its ring system, we
have also identified a whole collection
of Kiper belt objects of Huamean family
or Huamids.
These are a group of objects that are
all moving around the sun with similar
orbital parameters
and slowly in comparison to Huame only
at 150 m/s
difference or less. And so sharing this
common orbital characteristic and also
appearing to have very similar spectra
with a lot of that crystalline water ice
even on some of these smaller bodies.
And you can see just how many of them
there are. Some with names and others uh
just with catalog numbers. This Huamean
family probably originates from a giant
impact maybe a 100 million years ago,
perhaps s more recently that has created
from an original object that would have
been 1,660
kilometers in diameter based on
estimates of the overall mass. And
around 20% of that mass was scattered
leaving Huaame as the main object and
all the other smaller fragments in
separate orbits and expectations were
that the outer solar system and the
Kiper belt was so sparse that this would
be a very rare perhaps once in the solar
system only level of event. Um, and
that's interesting as we will see and as
I should talk about in some of my other
Kiper bell videos.
So expected to be very rare, but it
seems that the Huame system with its
moons and rings and all of those other
family members that failed to be
captured by the weak gravity of Huame
have moved off independently to orbit
around the sun are all fragments from
this cosmic catastrophe.
Now, the New Horizon space probe um took
an image of Huame, a series of them from
a distance of 49 astronomical units. Um
so that's a long way. It's a well as far
as it is from Earth to Huay in fact. So
at a completely diagonal angle across
the solar system and that's useful
because just from measurements of the
brightness based on the fact you're
looking at it from the side rather than
uh from pretty much the direction of the
sun, you can make inferences again about
the shape of the object and about the
light scattering capability of the
surface materials.
Now, various people have proposed
missions to go and investigate this
body. And I think that would be an
excellent idea. There's clearly a lot to
learn from it with the chemistry, the
red spot, the moons, the rings, uh,
understanding their origins and so
forth. And if you took enough flybys of
things like Jupiter and use the latest
technology, it could get there in about
15 years for a flyby. It would probably
take about 30 years if you wanted to
take a more looping path and arrange to
go into orbit. Uh but nothing's actually
on the books yet. So we're still hoping
that we might be able to see a plan for
a mission to Huame.
So thanks very much for listening and
I'll leave you this artist's impression
of Huame and its pair of moons.
Thanks again for listening.